Cpp tutorial (#1007)
pymor/pymor: docs/source/tutorial_external_solver.rst

Tutorial: Binding an external PDE solver to pyMOR
=================================================

> One of pyMOR's main features is easy integration of external solvers. In this tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of pyMOR's main features is easy integration of external solvers that implement the full-order model. In this tutorial
```

> we will do this step-by-step for a toy solver of the one-dimensional diffusion equation written in C++.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we will do this step-by-step for a custom toy solver of the one-dimensional diffusion equation written in C++.
If you use the `FEniCS <https://fenicsproject.org>`_ or `NGSovle <https://ngsolve.org>`_ PDE solver libraries,
you can find ready-to-use pyMOR bindings in the :mod:`~pymor.bindings` package. pyMOR support for
`deal.II <https://dealii.org>`_ can be found in a `separate repository <https://github.com/pymor/pymor-deal.II>`_.
```

Defining the PDE solver
-----------------------

> 

Reviewer: Briefly define the equation that is solved and say how it is discretized?

First, we need a class to store our data in and with some basic linear algebra operations
declared on it.

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.hh
    :lines: 4-19
    :language: cpp

Next, we need the operator that discretizes our PDE.

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.hh
    :lines: 22-32
    :language: cpp

Together with some header guards, these two snippets make up our :download:`model.hh <minimal_cpp_demo/model.hh>`.

The definitions for the `Vector` class are pretty straightforward:

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 7-35
    :language: cpp

Just like the diffusion operator that computes a central differences stencil:

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 39-49
    :language: cpp

This completes all the C++ code needed for the toy solver itself. Next, we will make this code usable from Python.
We utilize the `pybind11 <https://github.com/pybind/pybind11>`_ library to create a Python
`extension module <https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html>`_ named `model`, that allows us to manipulate

> instances of the C++ `Vector` and `DiffusionOperator` classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instances of the C++ `Vector` and `DiffusionOperator` classes.

Compiling the PDE solver as a shared library and creating Python bindings for it using 
`pybind11 <https://github.com/pybind/pybind11>`_, `Cython <https://cython.org>`_ or
`ctypes <https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html>`_ is the preferred way of integrating
external solvers, as it offers maximal flexibility and performance. For instance, in this
example we will actually completely implement the |Model| in Python using a
:mod:`time stepper <pymor.algorithms.timestepping>` from pyMOR to
:meth:`~pymor.models.interface.Model.solve` the |Model|.

When this is not an option,
`RPC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call>`-based approaches are
possible as well. For small to medium-sized linear problems, another option it to import
system matrices and snapshot data into pyMOR via file exchange and to use NumPy-based
:mod:`Operators <pymor.operators.numpy>` and :mod:`VectorArrays <pymor.vectorarrays.numpy>`
to represent the full-order model.
```

Binding the solver to Python
----------------------------

All of the C++ code related to the extension module is defined inside a scope started with

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 56-57
    :language: cpp

This tells pybind11 to make the contained symbols accessible in the module instance `m` that will be importable by the
name `model`. Now we create a new pybind11 `class\_` object that wraps the `DiffusionOperator`. Note that the module
instance is passed to the constructor alongside a name for the Python class and a docstring. The second
line shows how to define an init function for the Python object by using the special `py:init` object to
forward arguments to the C++ constructor.

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 60-61
    :language: cpp

Next, we define read-only properties on the Python side named after and delegated to the members of the C++ class.

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 62-63
    :language: cpp

> And the last `DiffusionOperator`-related line exposes the function call to apply in the same way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last `DiffusionOperator`-related line exposes the function call to apply in the same way:
```

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 64
    :language: cpp

This is everything that is needed to expose the operator to Python. We will now do the same for the `Vector`,
with a few more advanced techniques added.

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 66-68
    :language: cpp

Again we define a `py:class\_` with appropiate name and docstring, but now we also indicate to pybind11
that this class will implement the `buffer protocol <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html>`_, which basically
exposes direct access to the chunk of memory associated with a `Vector` instance to Python. We also see how we can dispatch multiple init functions

> by using `py:init` objects with C++ lambda functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by using `py:init` objects with C++ lambda functions.
Note that direct memory access to the vector data from Python is not required to integrate a solver with pyMOR.
It is, however, useful for debugging and quickly modifying or extending the solver from within Python. For instance,
in our toy example we will use the direct memory access to quickly define a visualization of the solutions and to
construct the right-hand side vector for our problem.
```

After creating a build directory for the module, we let cmake initialize the build and call make to execute the
compilation.

.. jupyter-kernel:: bash
    :id: make

.. jupyter-execute::

   mkdir -p source/minimal_cpp_demo/build
   cd source/minimal_cpp_demo/build
   cmake .. -DCMAKE_COLOR_MAKEFILE=OFF # prevent bash control chars in output
   make

You can download this snippet as a notebook file to be used with a bash kernel :jupyter-download:notebook:`make`.

To be able to use this extension module we need to insert the build directory into the path where the Python
interpreter looks for things to import. Afterwards we can import the module and create and use the exported classes.

.. jupyter-kernel::
.. jupyter-execute::

  import sys
  sys.path.insert(0, 'source/minimal_cpp_demo/build')

  import model
  mymodel = model.DiffusionOperator(10, 0, 1)
  myvector = model.Vector(10, 0)
  mymodel.apply(myvector, myvector)
  dir(model)

Using the exported Python classes with pyMOR
--------------------------------------------

..
  This only works after merging https://github.com/pymor/pymor/pull/1013
  In :doc:`tutorial-rb`

> In another tutorial, we have learned how pyMOR's algorithms operate on |VectorArrays| and |Operators|. To be able to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of pyMOR's algorithms operate on |VectorArray| and |Operator| objects that all share the same programming interface. To be able to use
```

our Python `model.Vector` and `model.DiffusionOperator` in pyMOR, we have to provide implementations of

> |VectorArray|, |VectorSpace| and |Operator| that wrap the classes defined in the extension module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|VectorArray|, |VectorSpace| and |Operator| that wrap the classes defined in the extension module
and translate calls to the interface methods into operations on `model.Vector` and `model.DiffusionOperator`.
```

Instead of writing a full implementaion of a |VectorArray| that manages multiple `model.Vector`
instances, we can instead implement a wrapper `WrappedVector` for a single `model.Vector` instance based on
:class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector` which will be used to create

> |ListVectorArray| via a :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.ListVectorSpace`-based `WrappedVectorSpace`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|ListVectorArrays| via a :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.ListVectorSpace`-based `WrappedVectorSpace`.
```

          return WrappedVector(obj)

      def __eq__(self, other):
          return type(other) is WrappedVectorSpace and self.dim == other.dim

Wrapping the `model.DiffusionOperator` is straightforward as well. We just need to attach
suitable |VectorSpaces| to the class and implement the application of the operator on a |VectorArray|
as a sequence of applications on single vectors.

.. jupyter-execute::

  class WrappedDiffusionOperator(Operator):
      def __init__(self, op):
          assert isinstance(op, DiffusionOperator)
          self.op = op
          self.source = WrappedVectorSpace(op.dim_source)
          self.range = WrappedVectorSpace(op.dim_range)
          self.linear = True

      @classmethod
      def create(cls, n, left, right):
          return cls(DiffusionOperator(n, left, right))

      def apply(self, U, mu=None):
          assert U in self.source

          def apply_one_vector(u):
              v = Vector(self.range.dim, 0)
              self.op.apply(u._impl, v)
              return v

          return self.range.make_array([apply_one_vector(u) for u in U._list])

Putting it all together
-----------------------

> As a demonstration, we will use our (stationary) toy diffusion solver in a transient example with timestepping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a demonstration, we will use our toy diffusion solver in a transient example with timestepping
```

> provided by pyMOR. For details on the discretization setup, see :doc:`tutorial01`. First up, we implement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provided by pyMOR. First up, we implement
```

I don't think that this tutorial really is a good reference, as much is said that isn't needed here and many other things are missing.

a `discretize` function that uses the `WrappedDiffusionOperator` and `WrappedVectorSpace` to assemble an
|InstationaryModel|.

.. jupyter-execute::

  from pymor.algorithms.pod import pod
  from pymor.algorithms.timestepping import ExplicitEulerTimeStepper
  from pymor.discretizers.builtin.gui.visualizers import OnedVisualizer
  from pymor.models.basic import InstationaryModel
  from pymor.discretizers.builtin import OnedGrid
  from pymor.operators.constructions import VectorOperator, LincombOperator
  from pymor.parameters.functionals import ProjectionParameterFunctional
  from pymor.reductors.basic import InstationaryRBReductor

  def discretize(n, nt, blocks):
      h = 1. / blocks
      ops = [WrappedDiffusionOperator.create(n, h * i, h * (i + 1)) for i in range(blocks)]
      pfs = [ProjectionParameterFunctional('diffusion_coefficients', blocks, i) for i in range(blocks)]
      operator = LincombOperator(ops, pfs)

      initial_data = operator.source.zeros()

>       # use to_numpy method of WrappedVector to setup rhs
>       # note that we cannot use the to_numpy method of ListVectorArray,
>       # since ListVectorArray will always return a copy
>       rhs_vec = operator.range.zeros()
>       rhs_data = rhs_vec._list[0].to_numpy()

Reviewer: This is a bit outdated. The following should work as well:

```suggestion
      rhs_vec = operator.range.zeros()
      rhs_data = rhs_vec._data[0]
```

Tutorial: Binding external PDE solver to pyMOR

> ================================================

Author: This was just nicer, not necessary, right?

> ================================================

Reviewer 2: Right.

After creating a build directory for the module, we let cmake initialize the build and call make to execute the
compilation.

.. jupyter-kernel:: bash
    :id: make

.. jupyter-execute::

   mkdir -p source/minimal_cpp_demo/build
   cd source/minimal_cpp_demo/build
   cmake .. -DCMAKE_COLOR_MAKEFILE=OFF # prevent bash control chars in output
   make

You can download this snippet as a notebook file to be used with a bash kernel :jupyter-download:notebook:`make`.

To be able to use this extension module we need to insert the build directory into the path where the Python
interpreter looks for things to import. Afterwards we can import the module and create and use the exported classes.

.. jupyter-kernel::
.. jupyter-execute::

  import sys
  sys.path.insert(0, 'source/minimal_cpp_demo/build')

  import model
  dir(model)
  mymodel = model.DiffusionOperator(10, 0, 1)
  myvector = model.Vector(10, 0)
  mymodel.apply(myvector, myvector)

Using the exported Python classes with pyMOR
--------------------------------------------

..
  This only works after merging https://github.com/pymor/pymor/pull/1013
  In :doc:`tutorial-rb`

> In another tutorial we have learned how pyMOR's algorithms operate on |VectorArrays| and |Operators|. To be able to use

Author: Didn't consider that about Operators.

our Python `model.Vector` and `model.DiffusionOperator` in pyMOR we have to provide implementations of
|VectorArray|, |VectorSpace| and |Operator| that

Instead of writing a full implementaion of a |VectorArray| that manages multiple `model.Vector`
instances we can instead implement a wrapper `WrappedVector` for a single `model.Vector` instance based on
:class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector` which will be used to create
|ListVectorArray| via a :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.ListVectorSpace` based `WrappedVectorSpace`.

The :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector` base class manages a reference count for
us and automatically copies data when necessary in methods :meth:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector.scal`

> and :meth:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector.axpy`. To use this we need to implement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and :meth:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.CopyOnWriteVector.axpy`. To use this, we need to implement
```

      def to_numpy(self, ensure_copy=False):
          # Note how this uses the buffer protocol setup to allow efficient
          # data access as a Numpy Vector
          result = np.frombuffer(self._impl, dtype=np.float)
          if ensure_copy:
              result = result.copy()
          return result

      def _copy_data(self):
          # This uses the second exposed 'init' signature to delegate to the C++ copy constructor
          self._impl = Vector(self._impl)

      def _scal(self, alpha):
          self._impl.scal(alpha)

      def _axpy(self, alpha, x):
          self._impl.axpy(alpha, x._impl)

      def dot(self, other):
          return self._impl.dot(other._impl)

      def l1_norm(self):
          raise NotImplementedError

      def l2_norm(self):
          return math.sqrt(self.dot(self))

      def l2_norm2(self):
          return self.dot(self)

      def sup_norm(self):
          raise NotImplementedError

      def dofs(self, dof_indices):
          raise NotImplementedError

      def amax(self):
          raise NotImplementedError

The implementation of the `WrappedVectorSpace` is very short as most of the necessary methods

> of |VectorSpace| are default implemented in :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.ListVectorSpace`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of |VectorSpace| are implemented in :class:`~pymor.vectorarrays.list.ListVectorSpace`.
```

.. jupyter-execute::

  class WrappedVectorSpace(ListVectorSpace):

      def __init__(self, dim):
          self.dim = dim

      def zero_vector(self):
          return WrappedVector(Vector(self.dim, 0))

      def make_vector(self, obj):
          # obj is a `model.Vector` instance
          return WrappedVector(obj)

      def __eq__(self, other):
          return type(other) is WrappedVectorSpace and self.dim == other.dim

> Wrapping the `model.DiffusionOperator` is straight forward as well. We just need to attach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wrapping the `model.DiffusionOperator` is straightforward as well. We just need to attach
```

suitable |VectorSpaces| to the class and implement the application of the operator on a |VectorArray|
as a sequence of applications on single vectors.

.. jupyter-execute::

  class WrappedDiffusionOperator(Operator):
      def __init__(self, op):
          assert isinstance(op, DiffusionOperator)
          self.op = op
          self.source = WrappedVectorSpace(op.dim_source)
          self.range = WrappedVectorSpace(op.dim_range)
          self.linear = True

      @classmethod
      def create(cls, n, left, right):
          return cls(DiffusionOperator(n, left, right))

      def apply(self, U, mu=None):
          assert U in self.source

          def apply_one_vector(u):
              v = Vector(self.range.dim, 0)
              self.op.apply(u._impl, v)
              return v

          return self.range.make_array([apply_one_vector(u) for u in U._list])

Putting it all together
-----------------------

> As a demonstration we will use our (stationary) toy diffusion solver in a transient example with timestepping

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a demonstration, we will use our (stationary) toy diffusion solver in a transient example with timestepping
```

> provided by pyMOR. For details on the discretization setup see :doc:`tutorial01`. First up we implement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provided by pyMOR. For details on the discretization setup, see :doc:`tutorial01`. First up, we implement
```

a `discretize` function that uses the `WrappedDiffusionOperator` and `WrappedVectorSpace` to assemble an
|InstationaryModel|.

.. jupyter-execute::

  from pymor.algorithms.pod import pod
  from pymor.algorithms.timestepping import ExplicitEulerTimeStepper
  from pymor.discretizers.builtin.gui.visualizers import OnedVisualizer
  from pymor.models.basic import InstationaryModel
  from pymor.discretizers.builtin import OnedGrid
  from pymor.operators.constructions import VectorOperator, LincombOperator
  from pymor.parameters.functionals import ProjectionParameterFunctional
  from pymor.reductors.basic import InstationaryRBReductor

  def discretize(n, nt, blocks):
      h = 1. / blocks
      ops = [WrappedDiffusionOperator.create(n, h * i, h * (i + 1)) for i in range(blocks)]
      pfs = [ProjectionParameterFunctional('diffusion_coefficients', blocks, i) for i in range(blocks)]
      operator = LincombOperator(ops, pfs)

      initial_data = operator.source.zeros()

      # use to_numpy method of WrappedVector to setup rhs

>       # note that we cannot use the data property of ListVectorArray,

Reviewer 2: The `data` property is deprecated.

Author: Hah, caught in the first, but not the second line :roll_eyes:

      # since ListVectorArray will always return a copy
      rhs_vec = operator.range.zeros()
      rhs_data = rhs_vec._list[0].to_numpy()
      rhs_data[:] = np.ones(len(rhs_data))
      rhs_data[0] = 0
      rhs_data[len(rhs_data) - 1] = 0
      rhs = VectorOperator(rhs_vec)

      # we can re-use pyMOR's builtin grid and visualizer for our demonstration
      grid = OnedGrid(domain=(0, 1), num_intervals=n)
      visualizer = OnedVisualizer(grid)

      time_stepper = ExplicitEulerTimeStepper(nt)

>       fom = InstationaryModel(T=1e-0, operator=operator, rhs=rhs, initial_data=initial_data,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      fom = InstationaryModel(T=1, operator=operator, rhs=rhs, initial_data=initial_data,
```

                              time_stepper=time_stepper, num_values=20,
                              visualizer=visualizer, name='C++-Model')
      return fom

Now we can build a reduced basis for our model. Note that this code is not specific to our wrapped classes. Those

> only directly used in the `discretize` call.

Reviewer 2: Something is missing in the last sentence.

Author: 'Those wrapped types are only directly used' maybe?

Reviewer 2: Sure.

> only directly used in the `discretize` call.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is missing something

.. jupyter-execute::

  %matplotlib inline
  # discretize
  fom = discretize(50, 10000, 4)
  parameter_space = fom.parameters.space(0.1, 1)

  # generate solution snapshots
  snapshots = fom.solution_space.empty()
  for mu in parameter_space.sample_uniformly(2):
      snapshots.append(fom.solve(mu))

  # apply POD

>   reduced_basis = pod(snapshots, modes=4)[0]

Reviewer 2: This creates two snapshots, but asks for 4 POD modes?

Author: Tbh, I didn't much look at the code. This is straight c&p form the existing demo

Reviewer 2: Ah, sorry, it's an instationary model...

  # reduce the model
  reductor = InstationaryRBReductor(fom, reduced_basis, check_orthonormality=True)
  rom = reductor.reduce()

  # stochastic error estimation
  mu_max = None
  err_max = -1.
  for mu in parameter_space.sample_randomly(10):

>       U_RB = (reductor.reconstruct(rom.solve(mu)))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      U_RB = reductor.reconstruct(rom.solve(mu))
```

      U = fom.solve(mu)
      err = np.max((U_RB-U).l2_norm())
      if err > err_max:
          err_max = err
          mu_max = mu

  # visualize maximum error solution
  U_RB = (reductor.reconstruct(rom.solve(mu_max)))
  U = fom.solve(mu_max)
  fom.visualize((U_RB, U), title=f'mu = {mu}', legend=('reduced', 'detailed'))

> As you can see in this comparison we get a good approximation of the full order model here and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see in this comparison, we get a good approximation of the full-order model here and
```

the error plot confirms it:

.. jupyter-execute::

  fom.visualize((U-U_RB), title=f'mu = {mu}', legend=('error'))

You can download this demonstration plus the wrapper definitions as a
notebook :jupyter-download:notebook:`tutorial_external_solver` or

> as a plain python script :jupyter-download:script:`tutorial_external_solver`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as a plain Python script :jupyter-download:script:`tutorial_external_solver`.
```

    :lines: 7-35
    :language: cpp

Just like the diffusion operator that computes a central differences stencil:

.. literalinclude:: minimal_cpp_demo/model.cc
    :lines: 39-49
    :language: cpp

This completes all the C++ code needed for the toy solver itself. Next, we will make this code usable from Python.
We utilize the `pybind11 <https://github.com/pybind/pybind11>`_ library to create a Python
`extension module <https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html>`_ named `model`, that allows us to manipulate
instances of the C++ `Vector` and `DiffusionOperator` classes.

Compiling the PDE solver as a shared library and creating Python bindings for it using
`pybind11 <https://github.com/pybind/pybind11>`_, `Cython <https://cython.org>`_ or
`ctypes <https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html>`_ is the preferred way of integrating
external solvers, as it offers maximal flexibility and performance. For instance, in this
example we will actually completely implement the |Model| in Python using a
:mod:`time stepper <pymor.algorithms.timestepping>` from pyMOR to
:meth:`~pymor.models.interface.Model.solve` the |Model|.

When this is not an option,

> `RPC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call>`-based approaches are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RPC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call>`_-based approaches are
```
